Once Around The Beehive cluster an
interesting little open cluster in the
rather obscure constellation of cancer
the crab I say obscure because it's
quite hard to find cancer there aren't
really any bright stars in it so it's
the uh gap between Leo and um Gemini but
the Beehive cluster is classified as m44
and it's right in the center toy
described it as a small cloud in the
heart of the crab um I guess he had very
much better Skies than we
do so you can find this with a pair of
binoculars very easily it's best viewed
with a small telescope and of course
Galileo was the first to turn the
telescope to the sky and this was one of
the first objects that he inspected with
it it's number 44 in Charles messier's
catalog of annoying things that were not
comets and it's pretty obviously not a
comet so in fact he probably put this
and a few of the other objects in the
catalog just to Beef It Up a bit um
because he wanted to have more objects
in his catalog than some of the uh
Rivals of the time had I think there was
a a few people who had about round about
40 objects and so he went a lot further
all the way up to about 100
in order to try and have the best
catalog and on the right there there's a
little map that was drawn by William
Shure uh in
1894 trying to very precisely map out
where the stars in The Beehive cluster
are it's about 610 light years away from
us measuring the distance these things
always uh certain amount of variability
so it depends which catalog you look in
as to exactly what number you get
um and we think that there are around
about a thousand stars in this group
adding up to just about 600 times the
mass of our
sun it's been around for 650 million
years or so plus or minus 50 and uh when
we do a count of the stars that are
present 2third of them are red dwarf
stars 30% of them are the Sun like stars
the late K orange stars G stars and F
stars um and just 2% tip over into the
slightly more massive a types category
and there are none that are more massive
than about two solar masses in the
entire
cluster and that makes sense because big
stars live fast and die
young if you have the uh a range of
stars made in a cluster you'll get
little ones through to very large Giants
so smallest red dwarfs orange dwarfs
sunlike Stars white stars and then the
blue hot Stars at the most massive end
of
things but they might be more massive
but they burn their fuel at a prodigious
rate and so round about a million years
after the most massive stars are born
they blow up as a supernova at the end
of their life
10 million years for the next rank down
so each step on the horizontal axis is a
factor of 10 here so 1 million in the
top row 10 million in the second row 100
million in the third row for the uh the
white stars roughly and then we have the
yellowy white yellow and red ones that
live a billion 10 billion 100 billion or
even a trillion years and so with an age
of 650 million for the cluster only the
stars that are less than about double
the mass of the Sun are still around all
of those larger ones so there are a few
of the less massive white ones around
but the majority of the white ones and
all of the blue and uh super giant stars
have exploded and died already and you
can see that when you do a survey of the
cluster and you look at the diagram of
temperature of Stars versus their
Luminosity the so-called Herz sprung
Russell HR diagram and what you find is
that rather than having a complete
mixture because all the stars were born
at the same time you have only those up
to the turnoff Point still present on
the main sequence diagonal and the
larger more massive stars than that have
already evolved off the main sequence
becoming giant stars as they run out of
nuclear fuel in their cores and start
going through the phases of converting
heavier
elements and in fact in the Beehive
cluster anything over about eight times
the mass of the Sun exploded long ago as
a
supernova um those guys would only live
for a 100 million years or so and the
smaller ones will have shed their
atmospheres and become white dwars and
in fact when we look in the cluster what
we find is just five of the thousand
stars are presently in the red giant
phase for uh K class kzero Stars so the
hot end of the orange stars and one that
is a yellow giant a gzo
star and then we have 11 white dwarfs
that have been located now there might
be more of these that we haven't found
yet but uh those have all come from the
more massive B type stars um and some of
the hotter a stars that have evolved
right through and become white dwarfs
now um of course the O class stars and
the hotter end of the B Stars will
probably have exploded as Supernova
rather than leaving these things behind
and so we might find a few Neutron St s
there but so far none have been
discovered now what's interesting about
these open clusters is that they sort
Their Stars by mass the process called
Mass segregation occurs what happens is
that as all the stars are orbiting
around the center of
mass they chaotically encounter each
other and have flybys and when they have
a flyby they swap momentum and energy
between
them and this process tends to lead to
an equalization of the energy um and the
consequence of that is that the massive
stars tend to sink in towards the center
and the small stars are hurled out
towards the edge you can see that in
this picture of this cluster where all
the big bright stars are in the middle
and all the faint ones are uh emanating
around around to the outside
there and of course the reason for this
is this equ partition rule uh for energy
when you have interactions you tend to
end up with an even spread of energy and
uh kinetic energy a half mv^ squ is
essentially the temperature of the
system and I don't mean how hot the
stars are I mean the uh kinetic energy
can be equated to a an overall system
temperature
tempure in the same way that molecules
moving around in a gas have a
temperature which is the average kinetic
energy of all of the
molecules and so what happens is that
this equalizes through the cluster but
of course given that the formula is a
half the mass times the square of the
Velocity if you have a large mass then
you have a lower velocity so that the
total kinetic energy remains constant
and a low velocity
by the virtue of Kepler's laws of
planetary motion gives you a small orbit
whereas smaller mass stars require a
higher velocity to end up with the same
kinetic energy and they end up in longer
orbits and so on average they spend most
of their time in the outer part of the
uh the
cluster and the smallest objects of all
might end up with such a high velocity
that they are above the escape Velocity
of the overall gravity of the system and
they end up not in a elliptical orbit
but in a hyperbolic orbit and are hurled
out of the cluster entirely and in fact
these clusters do boil away over time
the uh stars are thrown out of them
until the cluster
dissipates and we can certainly see that
we think in that we can't find any brown
dwarf stars
wandering around in orbits inside the
Beehive cluster these start would be
smaller objects than even the small red
dwarf stars getting down towards the
size of a free floating giant planet and
of course for these much lighter weight
characters they need to have a much
higher
velocity in order to have those same
average kinetic energy and so they tend
to pick up escape velocity and get
kicked out and so that's interesting
because it means that open clusters
probably form quite a lot of these brown
dwarf stars and free floating giant
planets but they all lose them very
rapidly and so there should be a lot of
them wandering around the
Galaxy what about planets themselves
that are still bound to their Stars well
in 2012 a couple of uh planets were
found orbiting Stars it was some
excitement because these were sunlike
stars and this was quite early for the
discovery of planets around sunlike
stars um but these were shown to be hot
Jupiters so they were giant planets
orbiting very close to their stars and
of course um there's a video that I did
about hot
Jupiters um this makes them easy to
detect so it's no surprise that we
should be finding them first but
subsequently with improving technology
we've managed to find nine more planets
around the members of this cluster and
so they're probably everywhere and uh
once we have better instruments to
inspect all these Stars we're going to
find that they've all got planets um
that seems to be the the way of things
and the result from the various surveys
that have been
done and just to end up with the other
interesting thing about the Beehive
cluster PR CP is that it sits roughly on
the ecliptic plane so the path that the
sun and the planets take through the sky
as they go around passes through or very
close to The Beehive cluster and this is
the planet Mars here passing by the
cluster and it uh indeed several of the
other planets have been spotted going
right across the face of it which makes
for a nice
photograph and indeed here's another one
where we've got a comet Comet C
2001 Q4 passing the uh beehive so I just
thought I'd end with those so I hope
you've enjoyed your little trip around
the Beehive cluster and thanks very much
for listening